##What PROBLEM does the block experiment address? What are the major stakes of the problem/challenge; why does it number among the 5 most important problems in urban sustainability?

>Cities face an array of problems related to their infrastructure (energy, water, transportation, food, etc.) systems, and the built environment is increasingly challenged by climate change. Existing structures are old and failing, money to repair and replace is scarce, and knowledge and political will to move forward in a more sustainable way is lacking. In this context, the Building Blocks Initiative employs advanced building technologies and big data to improve the sustainability of infrastructure and the built environment. In doing so, Building Blocks breaks down the barriers between urban systems (e.g. energy and water), buildings, and properties to promote increased sustainability, resilience, and community. Building Blocks emphasizes that projects serve as learning spaces for training and innovation – a necessary, but missing, component for facilitating the spread and adoption of sustainable practices. 

##What is a specific central challenge in this area that is yet unresolved?

>Current work around sustainable buildings is almost exclusively limited to individual buildings. This relates directly to how our society conceptualizes land use, but fails entirely to take advantage of synergies between buildings, how they are used, and the neighborhoods of which they are a part. Laws concerning property ownership, zoning regulations, and building codes prevent sharing resources like drinking water, stormwater, waste heat, electricity, and battery capacity between buildings or across property lines. The technology for sharing, while in development, is delayed by lack of demonstration projects. And while pioneers like cooperatives, ecovillages, and co-housing groups have started to realize some similar synergies, we still lack the social context for this kind of sharing. The Building Blocks Initiative will pilot innovative technologies, encourage new legal structures, and build new social contexts in three pilot sites around the country, exploring how these cross-building and cross-property synergies can be created, made legal, made practical, and disseminated across cities and around the country. 

 
##How does UW have a comparative advantage in this area/challenge relative to good work being done elsewhere (examples of work elsewhere welcome)?

>UW possesses recognized strength in many specific areas relevant to sustainable development. Moreover, there exists a legacy of work toward more distributed and less resource-intensive application of knowledge – with microgrid projects from engineering, small-scale biodigesters and urban agriculture from UW Nelson Institute and College of Agriculture, and landscape architecture studios around green infrastructure. The UW-system and Extension provide access to additional expertise in Architecture and building systems, as well as to hundreds of municipal partners of varying sizes. In-state private partnerships are a key component to the program’s success. Wisconsin’s connections to building technology firms – including Johnson Controls, Sloan Valve, and Kohler – offer the unique opportunity to unite building and information technologies through the Building Blocks Program thereby strengthening the national campaign and highlighting the role of the Midwest (aka Great Lakes Basin). The Mayor’s Innovation Project, based at UW’s Center on Wisconsin Strategy provides access to a network of leaders throughout the country from which to draw input and to promote successes. But perhaps most important is UW’s strong tradition of the Wisconsin Idea. This project embodies the goal of putting the University in service of the community. 

##If tasked with solving this specific challenge, what is the roadmap of steps that we would follow to address this problem (using a research/engagement model that has a "studio"-like component).

>As one of three pilot sites for the Building Blocks Initiative, Madison will identify a defined geography/neighborhood/block within which to work. There is no shortage of options – the Center for Resilient Cities’ Badger Rock Center is one, as are the Madison Sustainability Commerce Center, several proposed developments in the Capitol East District, Union Corners, the proposed public market district, and more.  A site will lead to obvious partners, but other partners, inside and outside of city government and the university, will be recruited into a project team. UW will build on existing momentum at UW around a campus-wide Livable Cities Initiative, which is preparing to launch a series of year-long ‘studios’ connecting UW rigor and expertise to community concerns. The studio activities and resources can be guided to supplement partnerships and progress of the Build Blocks Program. Over the course of the studio, expertise of UW faculty and staff would be combined with the vision and resources of the Building Blocks Initiative, the energy and curiosity of UW students, the knowledge and values of the Madison community, and the needs and goals of the participating property owners to create and implement a plan that connects multiple buildings and properties via one or more infrastructure systems (e.g. energy and water). The result is an entire community made more sustainable, empowered, and resilient. 

