#Urban Microgrids#

__1)	What is the PROBLEM ? What are the major stakes of the problem/challenge; why does it number among the five most important problems in urban sustainability?__

>About 30% of household carbon (CO2) emissions in a Midwestern city such as Milwaukee stem from electricity use, while much of the remaining portion of emissions is due to driving (~50%), and home heating (~20%). Any significant reduction in urban CO2 emissions will have to include a reduction in electricity footprint. Widespread adoption of wind and distributed solar generation and carbon-free base-load generation has the potential to eliminate this footprint. Furthermore, combined heat and power (CHP) systems and electric transportation have the potential to significantly reduce emissions from home heating and driving. These technologies will not be practical, however, without concomitant use of distributed energy storage and demand response technologies.  At present we do not have a viable and practical pathway for integrating distributed energy generation, distributed energy storage (including plug-in electric vehicles), automated demand management and carbon-free base-load generation. And such a transformation cannot occur without a serious change in consumer experience with electricity – in terms of what electricity is used for, when it is used, and how it is paid for. At present, consumer interactions with electrical systems are active (such as turning lights on and off), or passive (such as climate control systems), with a bill served at the end of each month. What we envision instead is an energy ‘aware’ consumer experience wherein information interfaces such as mobile phone and/or web interfaces are used for realizing end-use comfort with little human control effort. The information interface controls the power control backbone, and enables ‘smart’ operation of the power system to balance supply and demand with unprecedented levels of control. 

__2) 	What is a specific central challenge in this area that is yet unresolved?

>The technical viability of microgrids for integrating distributed generation and storage resources with the utility grid and automated demand response systems have been demonstrated broadly. In fact, automated and intelligent home energy management systems have been available for a decade. On the other hand, a compelling framework for integrating these technical solutions within the regulatory public utility paradigm has been largely absent. Much of the top-down smart-metering infrastructure that has been deployed lays dormant. Prototype operational and business models for incorporating microgrids within the existing electricity infrastructure do not exist today. Items for discussion have been limited to adoption of net-metering rules and relative roles of fixed connection fees and per-unit rates in the electricity tariff. These issues narrowly focus on the economics of investment by various parties, and do not accommodate the potential for the nuanced use of technology in realizing large-scale benefits. Other possibilities for this technology, such as utility-owned generation and storage assets in customer locations, third party owned assets, third party operated systems, peer-to-peer energy exchanges, revenue settlement systems, strategic role of price discrimination in limiting demand, energy service businesses at the retail consumer level, and e-commerce for electricity, are yet to enter the discussions. The potential to reduce electricity demand via human mediation essentially remains untapped.  Since we do not believe that a single, silver-bullet solution exists for realizing the dramatic reductions in the electricity footprint necessary for resilience, the Urban Microgrid project will provide a framework for integrating and exploring various solutions on the ground, and develop demonstrations and narratives that support the transformation of the electricity infrastructure and consumer experience to realize overall GHG reduction.

__3) 	How does UW have a comparative advantage in this area/challenge relative to good work being done elsewhere (examples of work elsewhere welcome).__

>The University of Wisconsin-Madison is an established pioneer and leader in the area of microgrids research, development and technology transfer. At present, UW-Madison researchers are leading an NSF-funded effort to develop technologies for energy use reduction in buildings through ‘human mediation’. Among others, one of the inspirations for this work is the ‘NESTTM learning thermostat’ that saves customers about 20% in their energy bills, while providing a friendly and attractive user interface that improves user comfort levels. We have developed and tested an ‘internet of electrical systems’ that includes  ‘learning lights’, etc. that can be integrated with the electrical system at single-family homes, multi-family dwellings and commercial buildings. The system can provide smart energy services to manage supply, demand and storage at a granular level, while remaining friendly to the user and keeping track of complex revenue arrangements (such as e-commerce). For instance, the system can provide real-time arbitrage and scheduling among asynchronous loads (such as freezers or air-conditioners) in various homes to ensure base load capacity is managed effectively.

__4) 	If tasked with solving this specific challenge, what is the roadmap of steps that we would follow to address this problem (using a research/engagement model that has a "studio"-like component).__

>Since UW-Madison is not a traditional utility rate-payer, a significant opportunity exists to create a ‘virtual utility’ within our community. Furthermore, the presence of campus cogeneration facility and district heating systems also provide unique opportunities for developing integrated solutions. We will work with the stakeholders to identify a candidate for a prototype Urban Microgrid demonstration district within the UW-Madison campus and create a policy/legal/regulatory framework for deployment of an Urban Microgrid testbed. In parallel, we will scale up our technology hardware and software by partnering with technology vendors to deploy the system. We will then deploy the system in a phased manner, starting with a single building, technology retrofits, user enablement and proceed further with multiple buildings, distributed solar systems, distributed storage, and automated base-load management. We will collect data, conduct experiments, evaluate and disseminate results, and expand the scope of the project through continuing partnerships.


__5) anything else you might want to add that points to the urgency of the problem and our capacity to solve it.
