#Smart Growth / Green Infrastructure

__1.  Problem__
>For nearly six decades following World War II, the predominant land development paradigm in the U.S. has been sprawl (i.e., separated land uses, low-densities, auto-oriented).  Yet as the nation’s population has grown, a multitude of negative social, economic, and environmental impacts from sprawl became increasingly evident.  In the 1990s, “smart growth” – a new development paradigm (yet with traditional, pre-WWII roots) took hold in a handful of metro areas with high quality transit (e.g., Washington, D.C.).  Smart growth (e.g., New Urbanism, low-impact development, green infrastructure) offers the promise of a more livable, prosperous, and sustainable future.

__2.  Challenge__
>Although the principles of designing healthier, more livable, and sustainable cities are easily enumerated, the central challenge is to enact policy and institutional changes needed to ensure more rapid diffusion from theory to practice.  This entails the alignment of policies, investments, and practices across disciplinary “silos’ which, at the local government level, are represented by separate departments and divisions (e.g., public health, parks and recreation, community planning, transportation/public works).  Green infrastructure – interconnected networks of parks and linear green spaces AND green streets, green roofs, and other elements of the public realm – has the potential to achieve multiple municipal objectives (e.g., flood control, linear recreation and non-motorized transportation, environmental protection, climate adaptation, economic development). 

__3.  Advantages__   
>The UW’s location in Madison – where there are several potential collaborators in local public sector departments and divisions – is a unique advantage.  ___Community-based research and engagement require willing partners.___  A bus-rapid transit (BRT) feasibility study was recently conducted as part of a $2 million HUD regional sustainability planning and implementation grant from the [federal Partnership for Sustainable Communities](http://urpl.wisc.edu/people/lagro/LaGro_CRSC%20Best%20Practices_final.pdf).   Moreover, Madison was recently awarded a [U.S. DOT Tiger Grant to begin master planning transit-oriented developments](  http://www.capitalregionscrpg.org/?p=1830) (TOD) for three future BRT station areas.   These TODs will be opportunities to retrofit the existing built environment to create medium-density, mixed-use, walkable urban places.  These retrofitted “urban villages” could be “natural experiments” – or local “learning labs” – fitted with cutting-edge technologies and infrastructure, and monitored using a suite of sustainability performance metrics.

__4.  Roadmap__   
>Place-based sustainability (livability) initiatives benefit from a nuanced understanding of the local and regional context (e.g., demographics, codes & ordinances, governance structure).  Especially with planning initiatives at the neighborhood, community, or regional scales, the process for engaging communities and collaborators (i.e., integrating across "silos") is critically important.  This new Livable Cities initiative could link up with and leverage other similar initiatives already happening in the Madison area (i.e., [Capital Region Sustainable Communities initiative](http://www.capitalregionscrpg.org/)). 

__5.  Complexity__
>Cities (and their surrounding regions) are complex adaptive systems.  The built environment’s structure is inextricably linked to its function.  And livability or sustainability initiatives – focusing on place-based stewardship – are inherently integrative and trans-disciplinary.  These initiatives require a carefully thought-out structure for cross-disciplinary coordination and collaboration (i.e., "collective impact").
